GETTING INTO IT

make time:
----------
take a couple hours once a week to cook a meal for yourself, giving yourself
time to do some research, take it slow, and enjoy yourself.  you can cook on
sunday for monday and tuesday, for example.

observe:
--------
know that you are feeding yourself.  invest your creative energy and beautiful
intentions for living into your food as you cook it.  cook to be happy.  ask
yourself what foods make you happy, both in the short term and in the long.
when you eat something you've made, feel your heart and your abdomen as you
digest it.  does it make you feel happy?  does it make you feel bloated and
tired?  observe, and learn what foods are right for you.  this process of
experimentation and observation is the exciting part of making your own food.
you have control over the variables!

eating is alchemy:
------------------
learning what foods you need is an essential part of living well for a long
time.  it is foundational to other life pursuits, because it is what fuels
them.  when you digest food, your food is becoming you.  by extension, your
food is becoming your life pursuits.

study:
------
whenever you're eating food that someone else has made, investigate what it is
made from.  learn from others' studies.  pumpkin seeds, dried cranberries,
sunflower seeds, black rice - these are all things i learned existed from food
prepared by others.  write what you find down on your grocery list, buy it,
then use at home yourself!


INGREDIENTS

staples:
--------
red peppers
mushrooms (white or portabella - cheaper than shiitake)
avocados
bananas
black beans
cous cous
peanut butter
heritage flakes
protein powder

on rotation:
------------
garbanzo beans
sweet potatoes
garlic
spinach
beets
pasta
veggie burger
eggs
alfalfa sprouts
tomatoes
cashews
pinenuts
broccoli
cauliflower
carrots
pineapples
...


SHOPPING THOUGHTS

if you know anyone with a COSTCO membership, it is worth a journey to see what
they have.  the cheapest nuts available, for example.

bulk beans are the cheapest way to go.  like, huge money saver.  an Instant Pot
makes using dry beans much more accessible.  i bought one for $99 and it has
proven to be quite nice to have.  worth asking Santa about, imo.  however! you
do not need an instant pot to use dry beans.  just wash them (in a strainer),
inspect for bad beans and remove them, then soak them at least 8 hours before
cooking them.  it may take a few times to find your groove, but that's ok -
part of the process.

it is better to buy too little groceries than too many.  don't throw away food!
do what you can to save food from going to waste.  if you have something going
bad in the fridge, don't eat out!  scrape the mold off and cook it!  this will
help you have a clean conscience.

white and gray molds are fine.  brightly colored molds can be toxic, though, so
do not eat anything with colored mold.  and do not eat food with maggots in it.
just throw it out.


STRATEGIES

0a. Preheat oven?

if i am roasting vegetables, i'll preheat the oven to 425degF.

0b. Make rice?

if i am making rice, i'll go ahead and get it started before i do anything
else.  it's usually done by the time my veggies are cut.  then i take it off
the burner and let it sit, covered.
if you're making cous cous, that's fine to do now too.  if the cous cous is
covered with a lid, it won't get too cold sitting while the rest of the food
cooks.

0c. Make black beans?

if using canned black beans, open up can, pour in sauce pan, and let 'em roll.
i bring them to a boil, stir, then reduce heat to simmer.  i like to add cumin,
black pepper, and salt to taste.  different brands of beans come with different
spices.  experiment to learn what you like.

1. Cutting vegetables

the shapes into which you cut your vegetables is highly preferential.
if you find yourself stumped or need inspiration, search "how to cut ____" in youtube.
a couple constraints that i keep in mind is how the pieces i'm cutting will feel in my mouth (too big?)
and the amount of the flavor of that vegetable per piece.
for example, if i want a big red bell pepper flavor in the dish, then i cut big red bell pepper pieces.

2. Sauteeing

i generally sautee.  i start by
- heating up OIL in the pan until it is runny (oil's viscosity is more like water when it is hot)
- if i am using GARLIC, i add it to the oil, until i can smell it in the air (about 10-15 seconds)
- add RED BELL PEPPER, let cook until it slightly brown
    note: if you want a veggie to brown, let it sit.  if you stir it, you're moving the surface touching the pan
- move to the side of the pan, then move that side with the peppers off the burner. this prevents it from burning
- add MUSTROOMS, add a little water for steam, cover pan with lid.  let steam until mushrooms are limp and juicy
- move mushies to side of pan, off burner, with peppers
- add whatever else
  - CARROTS need steaming. adding a little water then covering accellerates this process, making them soft faster.
    i like to add brown sugar on top of the carrots as they steam
  - same for BROCOOLI and CAULIFLOWER
- once the veggies are cooked, i might add GARBANZO BEANS
- or CASHEWS or PINE NUTS

3. Spicing

basics:
-------
for a long time, all i used was
- olive oil
- black pepper
- salt
- maybe cumin

and that was it!  starting out, i encourage you to just use olive oil, black
pepper, and salt.  you'll be amazed what these simple ingredients can do for
vegetables, and it will teach you to know the flavors of vegetables as they
are.

leafy greens:
-------------
i used to sautee kale a lot.  you can buy kale in huge bags for cheap and it is
nutrient-dense.  you will want to make sure you're chewing it, though, or it'll
pass through unabsorbed.  chewing breaks down the cell walls, releasing the
nutrients inside.

to sautee kale, chop into pieces you can fit into your mouth,
heat olive oil in pan,
add kale and some vegetable broth OR water and salt (broth is basically salty water)
cover, let steam

if you're sauteeing a leafy green like kale, chard, collard or mustard
greens, adding a splash of red wine or balsamic vinegar can really add a smile
to the dish.  splash it toward the end of sauteeing
